# In February 2023, Twitter, now X, removed free access to its Application Programming Interface (API). 
In this document, I discuss two articles surrounding X’s move to bar outside parties from accessing their API, which grants access to tweet data, and the impact this decision has on various dependents. These articles present differing perspectives on the industries and fields of work this decision impacts and affects. I will explore each of the articles and the effects this paywall will have on researchers and developers, respectively.

## Impact on Social Media Research
In the article, [Twitter's new data access rules will make social media research harder](https://www.npr.org/2023/02/09/1155543369/twitters-new-data-access-rules-will-make-social-media-research-harder), NPR details how X removed free access to their API which will stunt social media research. In the past, Twitter data has been a “treasure trove” when it comes to data surrounding online behavior. But in February of 2023, X abruptly cut off free access and began charging researchers $100 per month to have limited access to X’s data. Researchers will have to pay even more in order to access a larger portion of X’s data, thus making it even more difficult to study and draw conclusions surrounding online behavior and the impact that social media has on those who use it. The article, [Academic researchers blast Twitter’s data paywall as ‘outrageously expensive’](https://www.cnn.com/2023/04/05/tech/academic-researchers-blast-twitter-paywall/index.html) from CNN Business echoes this sentiment by explaining that this tiered paywall heavily restricts the amount of accessible data where even on the most expensive tiers, the access to the data is not sufficient for rigorous studies. 

To continue, NPR explains that various research institutions, advocacy groups, and individual researchers from all around the world have signed a letter that calls for X to maintain free access “for researchers so that public interest research could continue.” However, this request has largely gone unanswered. Prior to this paywall on data, X was considered one of the most "transparent" platforms regarding data because it allowed researchers to download and explore massive amounts of data which aided in t research initiatives surrounding the understanding of online communities and the spreading of misinformation. Due to the paywall introduced by X NPR predicts, and I agree, that there will be a large migration of researchers to other platforms as data access is no longer as accessible on X as it used to be. Further, this will indeed stunt research on information operations and conspiracy theories as X was a large provider of data in these lines of research. Moreover, this decision by X will increase inequity among researchers as those who have access to funds and resources will have the privilege to access and study X’s data, however, those who lack the resources will no longer be able to access this data creating a larger disparity within the social media research field. 

## Developers and Twitter’s API
In the article, [Twitter’s Cancelling Free Access to its API, Which Will Shut Down Hundreds of Apps](https://www.socialmediatoday.com/news/Twitter-Shuts-Down-Free-API-Access/641818/), Social Media Today details how X cutting off free access to their API hinders the operation of “many apps, bot accounts, and other tools that” use the API to function. Many of these apps and various functions that utilize the API contribute to the X ecosystem, but this mutually beneficial relationship will cease to exist with the paywall. Many automated update apps will move to different platforms to operate which will also allow X competitors to gain a foothold in the social media space. Social Media Today states that this paywall is ignorant of how the developer community has contributed to and facilitated Twitter’s growth. This attempt to crack down on bots harms those who developed and utilized bots as management tools, schedulers, and automated updates. Thus, various tools within the app will go extinct and many users and developers will go elsewhere.

Furthermore, in [Twitter Ends Its Free API: Here’s Who Will Be Affected](https://www.forbes.com/sites/jenaebarnes/2023/02/03/twitter-ends-its-free-api-heres-who-will-be-affected/?sh=55438d5d6266) Forbes details how this impacts developers specifically. Developers often use the API to promote and develop their projects, however, with the paywall they will either have to pay X a fee or stop their projects altogether. Many developers create bots on the platform or create tools utilizing X data to gather sophisticated targeting criteria and trend analytics. Therefore, this impacts “hundreds of thousands of users who use the tools,” created by developers through the X API, “to build engagement on their own platforms.” This paywall halts innovation and damages the usability of X. As within the field of research, this decision by X will increase inequity among developers as those who have access to a wide breadth of resources will have the privilege to continue to use X's API to develop, however, those who lack the resources will no longer be able to access the API creating inequity among and within the developing community. 